{\rtf1\ansi\deff12
\sectd \ftnbj {\*\listtable
{\list\listtemplateid536870969\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc4\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ; }\listid57}
{\list\listtemplateid536870970\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc2\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ; }\listid58}
{\list\listtemplateid536870971\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc3\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ; }\listid59}
{\list\listtemplateid536870972\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc1\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ; }\listid60}
{\list\listtemplateid536870968\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}}{\listname ; }\listid56}
}{\*\listoverridetable
{\listoverride\listid57\listoverridecount0\ls5}
{\listoverride\listid58\listoverridecount0\ls4}
{\listoverride\listid59\listoverridecount0\ls3}
{\listoverride\listid60\listoverridecount0\ls2}
{\listoverride\listid56\listoverridecount0\ls1}
}
{\fonttbl
{\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 MS Sans Serif;}
{\f12\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f17\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier New;}
{\f24\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}
}
{\stylesheet
{\s0\fs20\snext0 Base;}
{\s1\f17\fs16\keep\sbasedon2\snext1 ADDRESS;}
{\s3\b\snext3 Banner Base;}
{\s4\f24\li360\ri360\sbasedon2\snext4 BQ;}
{\s5\fs20\li360\fi-360\tx360{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvlblt\pnstart1\pnf29\pnfs20}\sbasedon0\snext5 Bullet1;}
{\s6\fs20\li360\fi-360\tx360{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvlblt\pnstart1\pnf29\pnfs20}\sbasedon0\snext6 Bullet2;}
{\s7\fs20\li360\fi-360\tx360{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvlblt\pnstart1\pnf29\pnfs20}\sbasedon0\snext7 Bullet3;}
{\s8\fs20\li360\fi-360\tx360{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvlblt\pnstart1\pnf29\pnfs20{\pntxtb \'a1}}\sbasedon0\snext8 Bullet4;}
{\s9\fs20\li360\fi-360\tx360{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvlblt\pnstart1\pnf29\pnfs20}\sbasedon0\snext9 Bullet5;}
{\s10\fs12\b\li-144\sbasedon3\snext10 Button Bar;}
{\*\cs11\additive\f0\fs0\i\snext11 CITE;}
{\*\cs12\additive\f17\fs0\snext12 CODE;}
{\s13\f24\li360\sbasedon2\snext13 DD;}
{\*\cs14\additive\f0\fs0\i\snext14 DFN;}
{\s15\f24\li360\sbasedon2\snext15 DIR;}
{\s16\f24\li720\sbasedon2\snext16 DIR_LI;}
{\s17\f24\sbasedon2\snext17 DL;}
{\s18\f24\sbasedon2\snext18 DT;}
{\*\cs19\additive\f0\fs0\i\snext19 EM;}
{\s20\f24\fs48\b\sbasedon2\snext20 H1;}
{\s21\f24\fs36\b\sbasedon2\snext21 H2;}
{\s22\f24\fs28\b\sbasedon2\snext22 H3;}
{\s23\f24\b\sbasedon2\snext23 H4;}
{\s24\f24\fs20\b\sbasedon2\snext24 H5;}
{\s25\f24\fs16\b\sbasedon2\snext25 H6;}
{\s2\f24\snext2 HTMLBASE;}
{\*\cs26\additive\f17\fs0\b\snext26 KBD;}
{\s27\f17\fs16\keep\sbasedon2\snext27 LISTING;}
{\s28\f24\li360\sbasedon2\snext28 MENU;}
{\s29\f24\li720\sbasedon2\snext29 MENU_LI;}
{\s30\fs20\li360\fi-360\tx360{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}\ls1\sbasedon0\snext30 Number1;}
{\s31\fs20\li360\fi-360\tx360{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}\ls2\sbasedon0\snext31 Number2;}
{\s32\fs20\li720\fi-360\tx720{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvl1\pnucltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}\ls3\sbasedon0\snext32 Number3;}
{\s33\fs20\li1080\fi-360\tx1080{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvl1\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}\ls4\sbasedon0\snext33 Number4;}
{\s34\fs20\li1440\fi-360\tx1440{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvl1\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}\ls5\sbasedon0\snext34 Number5;}
{\s35\f24\li360{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvl1\pndec\pnstart1\pnf0\pnfs24{\pntxta .}}\ls1\sbasedon2\snext35 OL;}
{\s36\f24\fs20\li720\fi-360\tx720{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvl1\pndec\pnstart1\pnf0\pnfs20{\pntxta .}}\ls1\sbasedon2\snext36 OL_LI;}
{\s37\f24\sa120\sbasedon2\snext37 P;}
{\s38\f17\fs20\keep\sbasedon2\snext38 PRE;}
{\*\cs39\additive\f0\fs0\b\snext39 SAMP;}
{\*\cs40\additive\f0\fs0\b\snext40 STRONG;}
{\*\cs41\additive\f17\fs0\snext41 TT;}
{\s42\f17\fs12\sbasedon0\snext42 Typewriter;}
{\s43\f24\li360{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvlblt\pnstart1\pnf29\pnfs24}\sbasedon2\snext43 UL;}
{\s44\f24\fs20\li720\fi-360\tx720{\*\pn\pnlvlcont\pnlvlblt\pnstart1\pnf29\pnfs20}\sbasedon2\snext44 UL_LI;}
{\*\cs45\additive\f0\fs0\i\snext45 VAR;}
{\s46\f17\fs20\keep\sbasedon2\snext46 XMP;}
}
\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554484}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ Contents}
{\up #}{\footnote # Contents}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0001}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b Welcome }{\plain\b To Fracas!}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=210}}{\fldrslt }}\{bml FRACASICON1.BMP\}Choose a topic below, or }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777361}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 click here}}{\v Expanded_Table_Of_Contents}{\plain\fs20  for an expanded table of contents.\par 
}\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777283}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 1 Welcome }{\fs20 To Fracas!}}{\v 1_Welcome_To_Fracas}{\plain\fs20 }\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777253}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 2 Getting Started}}{\v 2_Getting_Started}{\plain\fs20 }\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777252}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3 How To Play}}{\v 3.1_Parts_Of_The_Screen}{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777288}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4 Tweaking The Map}}{\v 4.1_Generating_A_New_Map}{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777289}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5 Tweaking Gameplay}}{\v 5.1_The_Options_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777290}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 6 Strategies, Tips, And Tricks}}{\v 6_Strategies__Tips__And_Tricks}{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777291}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 7 How Does Fracas Work?}}{\v 7_How_Does_Fracas_Work_}{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777292}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 8 Credits & Acknowledgements}}{\v 8_Credits___Acknowledgements}{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777293}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 9 How To Contact The Author}}{\v 9_How_To_Contact_The_Author}{\plain\fs20 \par 
\par 
}\par 
\pard\s42 \plain\f17\fs12\b {\plain\f17\fs12   XXXX     XXXXXXXXXXX   X                         \par 
 XXXXXX   XXXXXXXXXXXXXX X                         \par 
XXX   XXXXXXX         XXXX                        \par 
XXX    XXXX            XXX                          \par 
 XXX   XXX              XX                             \par 
  XXX  XXX               X                                   \par 
       XXX               X                                       \par 
       XXX                                                   \par 
       XXX     X                                               \par 
       XXX     X                                                    \par 
       XXXX   XX                                                          \par 
       XXXXXXXXX                                                        X       \par 
       XXXX   XX                                                        XX      \par 
       XXX     X       XXXX            XXX                       XXX    XXX     \par 
       XXX     X XXX  XXXXXX  XXXXX   XX     XXXX X     XXXXX   XX      XXXX    \par 
       XXX      XXXX XX    XXXX   XX XX    XXX  XXX   XXX   XX XX      XXXXXX   \par 
       XXX     XX XXXX     XXX     XXX    XXX    XX  XXX     XXX       XXX XXX  \par 
       XXX   XXX  XXX     XXX      XXX   XXX      X XXX      XXX      XXX   XXX \par 
       XXX XXX    XXX     XXX      XXX   XXX        XXX      XXX      XXX   XXX \par 
       XXX        XXX     XXX      XXX   XXX        XXX      XXX     XXX     XXX\par 
       XXX        XXX     XXX      XXX   XXX        XXX      XXX     XXX     XXX\par 
       XXX        XXX     XXX      XXX   XXX        XXX      XXX    XXX      XXX\par 
 XXX   XXX        XXX     XXX      XXX   XXX        XXX      XXX    XXX      XXX\par 
XXX   XXXX  XXX   XXX      XXX     XXX    XXX      XXXXX     XXX   XXX XX   XXX \par 
XXX  XXXX  XXX   XXX        XXX   XX XX  XXXXX   XXX  XXX   XX XX  XXX  XX  XXX \par 
 XXXXXX     XXXXXXX           XXXXX   XXXX   XXXXX      XXXXX   XXXXX    XXXX   }\par 
\pard\s0 \plain\fs20 {\plain\fs20 }\page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554494}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 1 Welcome To Fracas}
{\up #}{\footnote # 1_Welcome_To_Fracas}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0002}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b 1 Welcome }{\plain\b To Fracas!}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\plain\fs20\b   1.1 What Is Fracas?}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
Fracas is a strategy game of tactical combat and world conquest, based very loosely on the board game "Risk".  In Fracas, up to four human or computer players duke it out over land and water.  Players deploy troops and build ports to attack opponents' countries and defend their own.\par 
\par 
Everything in Fracas is customizable!  The maps in the game are always randomized, allowing players to continually explore the tactical advantages of new worlds.  The parameters that govern the size, shape, and mechanics of the world are tunable by the user as well.  There are also multiple computer 'personalities' to play against.  With so many options, it's easy to get addicted!}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\plain\fs20\b   1.2 How Do I Win?}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
Fracas is an easy game to learn, yet a hard game to master.  Even so, the objective is very simple:  the last player left on the map is the winner!\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b   1.3 System Requirements}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\plain\fs20 Fracas should work with no problems on any Intel Pentium PC with a P-200 processor or faster.  It has not been tested on other brands of CPUs or slower ones.  Most development work was performed on a PII-266.  I suspect that unless a machine is really }{\plain\fs20\i really}{\plain\fs20  old, Fracas will work fine.}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
Windows 95, 98, or NT4.0 is required to run Fracas.  It has not been tested on other operating systems.\par 
\par 
If you can't get Fracas to run, feel free to contact me and I'll help if I can.  Refer to section 9 for details.}{\plain\fs20 }\par\pard \page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554496}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 2 Getting Started}
{\up #}{\footnote # 2_Getting_Started}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0003}
\plain\b 
2 Getting Started\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\plain\fs20\b   2.1 Installing Fracas}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\plain\fs20 To install Fracas, first run the self-extracting installer, Fracas.exe.  This will unpack the InstallShield setup files into a temporary directory.  Just choose all the defaults and Fracas setup will begin afterward.\par 
\par 
When the InstallShield setup starts, click the "Next" button to advance through the setup screens.  Choose a destination directory when instructed to do so.  After installation, the computer may need to be rebooted.  Simply follow the prompts.\par 
\par 
When installation is complete, Fracas can be started from the Start menu.  Alternately, the executable in the installation folder can be double-clicked.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b   2.2 Starting A Game}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
For those people who just can't stand to read instructions, go to the "Game" menu and choose "New Game, New Map".  All of the default settings will be used and a four-player game with one human and three computer players will start.\par 
\par 
After the computer players whoop up on you for a while, come back to the help file at this point and read on.\par 
}\par 
{\plain\fs20\b       2.2.1 New Game, New Map}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This option will generate a brand new world map for you to conquer based on the settings in the "Terraform" and "Options" menus.  Selecting "New Game, New Map" will start a brand new game on this map, and Player 1 will have the first move.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       2.2.2 New Game, Same Map}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This option is not available until a map has been generated.  Choosing "New Game, Same Map" will start a brand new game on the same map used in the last game.  None of the settings in the Terraform menu will be considered when starting this game.  Player 1 will have the first move when the game starts. }{\plain\fs20 }\par\pard \page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554498}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 3.1 Parts Of The Screen}
{\up #}{\footnote # 3.1_Parts_Of_The_Screen}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0004}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b 3 How To Play}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 This section explains the details of the game.  All screen elements, gameplay elements, and otherwise are described in this section.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b   3.1 Parts Of The Screen}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=205}}{\fldrslt }}\{bml MAP1.BMP\}}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       3.1.1 The Map}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The map area is the largest part of the game window.  This is where all of the action takes place and where the player clicks on countries to perform actions.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       3.1.2 The Statistics Panel}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The statistics panel is in the upper-right corner of the game window.  Each of the four players has a slot in the statistics panel, and each player's name is shown backlit by their empire's color.\par 
\par 
Under each player's name is a running total of the number of countries owned by that player, followed by the current number of troops that player controls in all countries combined.\par 
\par 
For example, if "5 : 137" is shown underneath a particular player's name, it means that player controls five countries on the map, and the total number of troops in all five countries is 137.\par 
\par 
A player's name turns gray and the running totals disappear if a player is eliminated from the game.\par 
}\par 
{\plain\fs20\b       3.1.3 The Information Panel}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The information panel is the large box to the right of the map.  This box gives the player information about a particular country or water mass when that item is right-clicked.  Human players can right-click countries for information at any time during the game.\par 
\par 
If one of the player's own countries is right-clicked, this panel will show the country's name and the total defense strength (explained in section 3.}{\plain\fs20 4) of the country.\par 
\par 
If an enemy country is right-clicked, this panel will show the country's name, and the total defense strength of the enemy country.  In addition, if it is a human's turn the human's attack total for this country will also be shown.\par 
\par 
When an attack or defense total is shown in the information panel, the number of countries that are participating in that total are shown below it.  These are split up between adjacent countries and overseas countries (explained in section 3.2).\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       3.1.4 Messages}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
At the very bottom of the game window are two lines of dynamic message text.\par 
\par 
The bottom of these two is a running commentary of the game's progress.  This line of text is always visible and explains what is currently happening in the game.  When it is a human's turn, instructions are provided here.  When it is a computer's turn, this line explains what the computer is doing.  This text is always backlit in the active player's color.\par 
\par 
The top of these two shows text for 'special' occasions.  When a human player makes an invalid move, the reasons for the error are shown here.  If anything else important happens during the game, such as a random event (explained in section 5.1.7) it will be explained here.\par 
}{\plain\fs20 }\page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554500}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 3.2 The World Map}
{\up #}{\footnote # 3.2_The_World_Map}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0005}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b 3 How To Play}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\plain\fs20\b   3.2 The World Map}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The world map is composed of entities called countries.  It's easy to think of these countries as real-world countries -- They have both a prescribed border and a government that is separate from the countries around it.\par 
\par 
Countries can directly border other countries.  In this case, a borderline is drawn between the neighboring countries.  These countries are said to have "land" contact and are called "adjacent" countries.  No ports are necessary to travel from a country adjacent to another.\par 
\par 
Countries can also exist as isolated clusters of countries surrounded by water, or as single-country islands.  If a country can only reach another country across water, then they are said to have "water" contact and are called "overseas" countries.  A port is required to travel between overseas countries.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       3.2.1 Unclaimed Countries}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
At the start of a new game, all countries on the map are unclaimed.  An unclaimed country is just that -- a country that is not owned by any player.\par 
\par 
Unclaimed countries can hold neutral troops.  However, these countries do not have attack or defense strengths, and do not participate in combat in any way.\par 
\par 
An unclaimed country can be annexed by a player during that player's action phase if that player can reach the country by land or water.\par 
\par 
Unclaimed countries are either green or white depending on the neutral color setting (explained in section 4.3.2).\par 
\par 
     }{\plain\fs20\b  3.2.2 Claimed Countries}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
A claimed country is a country that is owned by a player.  A claimed country's primary purpose is to hold troops for the player that owns it.  These troops add to attack and defense strengths for that player.  A claimed country can participate in combat.\par 
\par 
Claimed countries also add to the number of reinforcement troops (explained in section 3.3.1) a player receives during their turn.\par 
\par 
A claimed country is shown in the color of the player that owns it.\par 
\par 
 }{\plain\fs20\b      3.2.3 HQs}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The HQ is the most important country that a player can own.  It's easy to think of a player's HQ as their "capital".\par 
\par 
Each player selects an HQ during their first turn.  Choose wisely, because the HQ cannot be moved later.\par 
\par 
Defend the HQ at all costs, because if a player's HQ is lost, that player is eliminated from the game.\par 
\par 
An HQ is shown in the color of the player that owns it, but with a crosshatch pattern to distinguish it from other countries.\par 
\par 
   }{\plain\fs20\b    3.2.4 Ports And Water}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The port is a very significant invention in the lives of your little Fracas-folk, because with a port, a country can have influence over faraway lands.\par 
\par 
A country that has a port will be able to provide attack and defense support to overseas countries.  Note that a country can influence other overseas countries only if they share a common water mass.  In other words, if the same water mass borders two countries, one of those countries can reach the other if it has a port built on it.\par 
\par 
An important point:  ports make naval combat possible, but do not affect attack and defense totals themselves.  In other words, building a port on country X does not "beef up" country X's defense in any way.  It will, however, allow troops in country X to defend other overseas countries.\par 
\par 
A country can have only one port built on it.  Ports are shown as docks and piers along the country's border.  Ports can only be built during a player's action phase.\par 
}{\plain\fs20 }\page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554502}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 3.3 Phases Of A Turn}
{\up #}{\footnote # 3.3_Phases_Of_A_Turn}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0006}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b 3 How To Play}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\plain\fs20\b   3.3 Phases Of A Turn}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
Throughout the game, each player takes their turn in sequence, starting with Player 1.  This sequence is never altered.\par 
\par 
Each player chooses an HQ country during their first turn.  After that, each player's turn is composed of three individual phases:  The reinforcement phase, the action phase, and the troop movement phase.\par 
\par 
The running commentary text at the bottom of the screen will always indicate which player's turn it is and the current phase.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       3.3.1 Troop Reinforcement Phase}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
Presumably while all this military warfare is going on in the world, the military is training new soldiers to join the fight.  The first thing that a player does when it is their turn is add reinforcements to their army.\par 
\par 
The number of reinforcements that a player gets to deploy depends on the number of countries that player owns.  The number of bonus troops received per country owned is configurable, and is explained in section 5.1.3.\par 
\par 
To deploy troops in a country, the active player must click on a country that they own.  All available troops are then deployed in that country.  It is not possible to deploy troops to more than one country per turn.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       3.3.2 Action Phase}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
Now comes the fun part.  During the action phase, a player can do ONE of the following actions:  Annex unclaimed land, build a port, attack one enemy country, or pass their action phase.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b             3.3.2.1 Annexing Land}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
To annex land, simply click on an unclaimed country.  If the active player can reach that country by either land or sea, the country becomes the property of the player.  All neutral troops in the country are also added to the active player's forces.\par 
\par 
Remember that it is only possible to claim land overseas if you have a port.\par 
\par 
         }{\plain\fs20\b    3.3.2.2 Building A Port}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
A player can build a port by clicking on a country that they own.  If the country is owned by the player and does not have a port on it already, a port will be built.\par 
\par 
Once a country has a port, it can participate in overseas combat.\par 
}\par 
{\plain\fs20\b             3.3.2.3 Attacking An Oppenent}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
To attack an enemy country, simply click on the enemy's country.  If the active player has a higher attack total than the defender's defense total, the attack succeeds and damage is dealt.  If not, the attack is disallowed and the active player can perform another action.\par 
\par 
It may be helpful to right-click a prospective enemy country first to see if it is possible to attack it, and to get a feeling for how well-defended a particular area of the map is.\par 
\par 
The mysteries of attack and defense totals are explained in section 3.4.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       3.3.3 Troop Movement Phase}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
Once an action is performed, each player has an opportunity to move troops from one place to another.  This is done in a three-step process:\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b 1. }{\plain\fs20  Click the country to move troops FROM.\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b 2. }{\plain\fs20  Enter the amount of troops to move in the lower right corner.\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b 3. }{\plain\fs20  Click the country to move troops TO.\par 
\par 
The interface for choosing the number of troops is designed to make troop movements easy.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20 {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=206}}{\fldrslt }}\{bml MOVE1.BMP\}\par 
\par 
If a specific number of troops is desired, that number can be entered directly into the edit box.\par 
\par 
The plus and minus signs add or subtract 1 troop from the current amount.\par 
\par 
The 1/4, 1/2, 3/4, and ALL buttons can be clicked to select that fraction of the total troops in the FROM country.  This number will be automatically entered in the edit box.\par 
\par 
The number of troops defaults to the full amount of troops in the FROM country.  In other words, if you don't use the movement interface, ALL troops will move out of the FROM country and into the TO country.\par 
\par 
Remember that you must click on the destination country to perform the troop movement.  If no troop movement is desired, this phase can be passed with the "Pass..." button.\par 
\par 
After moving troops, play passes to the next player.\par 
\par 
    }{\plain\fs20\b   3.3.4 Passing and Resigning}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
In the course of taking over the world, it will likely be necessary to leave your empire as it stands for a turn or two.  It is possible to skip the action or troop movement phases of a player's turn by clicking the "Pass..." button in the upper right of the screen.  Passing the action phase will still allow the player to make a troop movement.  Passing the troop movement phase will start the next player's turn.\par 
\par 
If a player wants to leave the game prematurely, the "Resign..." button in the lower right corner can be clicked.  This will immediately remove the active player from the game.  The remaining players will continue as normal.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20 }\page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554504}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 4.1 Generating A New Map}
{\up #}{\footnote # 4.1_Generating_A_New_Map}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0008}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b 4 Tweaking The Map}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\plain\fs20\b   4.1 Generating A New Map}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
One of the features of Fracas is the ability to change the parameters that govern the shape of the map.  Some players like more water, others like more land.  Using the options in the "Terraform" menu, all players can be satisfied.\par 
\par 
Whenever the "New Game, New Map" option under the "Game" menu is selected, a new map is constructed from the current settings in the "Terraform" menu.  The game must then be aborted or ended before a new map can be generated.}{\plain\fs20 }\par\pard \page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554506}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 4.2 The Terraform Menu}
{\up #}{\footnote # 4.2_The_Terraform_Menu}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0009}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b 4 Tweaking The Map}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\plain\fs20\b   4.2 The Terraform Menu}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The Terraform menu contains all the parameters that affect building of the world map.  Note that these parameters can only be changed when a game is not currently in progress.  In other words, you can't change how the game is played in the middle of the game.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       4.2.1 Country Size}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This property specifies the approximate size of the countries on the map.  There are five settings, from very small to very large.\par 
\par 
Larger countries proportionally cover more of the visible map, and as a consequence there are generally fewer of them.  Smaller countries are much more numerous.\par 
\par 
This setting, combined with the land to water ratio (explained in section 4.2.5) determine the approximate number of countries present on the map.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to medium sized countries.\par 
\par 
 }{\plain\fs20\b      4.2.2 Country Proportions}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This property specifies how similar in size each country on the map is.  There are three settings, from proportional to unproportional.\par 
\par 
Proportional countries are generally all the same size.  Unproportional countries can vary quite a bit in overall size.  Take for example, the size difference between the United States and say, Cuba.  In an unproportional map, this kind of size discrepancy is possible.  In a proportional map, all countries would be about the same size (in square miles) as Cuba.\par 
\par 
Note that as a map becomes more unproportional, the land to water ratio (explained in section 4.2.5) becomes less accurate.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to somewhat proportional countries.\par 
\par 
 }{\plain\fs20\b      4.2.3 Country Shapes}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This property specifies (for lack of a better term) how strangely the countries on the map are shaped.  There are three settings, from normal to very irregular.\par 
\par 
Normal countries are generally blob-shaped and circular.  Irregular countries are artifically distorted to give them longer and thinner tracts of land.  Irregular countries tend to be more life-like, tend to border more countries as a result, and generally make more interesting maps.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to irregular shaped countries.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       4.2.4 Minimum Allowed Lake Size}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies the smallest allowable lakes on the map.  In other words, there will be no lakes on the map smaller than this setting.  There are four settings, from large lakes to very small lakes.\par 
\par 
The fourth setting, "No Lake Correction", means that all water areas on the map are left intact after the computer places countries.  This allows for lots of very tiny lakes on the map.  The other three settings will cause the computer to 'fill in' small water masses with land.  Experiment with this one to find the setting that works best.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to medium sized lakes.\par 
\par 
 }{\plain\fs20\b      4.2.5 Approximate Land To Water Ratio}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies the approximate amount of land present on the world map.  There are five settings:  10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 90% land.\par 
\par 
The settings are given in a land to water ratio.  1:9 will produce a map with very little (10%) land, while 3:1 will produce a map with about three-quarters land.\par 
\par 
This setting will affect the length of the game.  Games without much land don't last as long as games with lots of land.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to a 3:1 land to water ratio.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       4.2.6 Islands}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies whether or not the map will contain islands (isolated masses of land), and how many.  There are three settings:  None, Some, and Lots.\par 
\par 
If None is selected, there will only be one mass of land on the map.  The other two settings will produce islands.  The Lots setting will produce many more islands than the Some setting.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to some islands.}{\plain\fs20 }\par\pard \page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554508}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 4.3 The Draw Menu}
{\up #}{\footnote # 4.3_The_Draw_Menu}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0010}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b 4 Tweaking The Map}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\plain\fs20\b   4.3 The Draw Menu}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The Draw menu contains settings that change how the map is displayed to the player.  These settings can be changed at any time during game play.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       4.3.1 Borders}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies how borders between adjacent countries look to the user.  There are five settings.  Experiment to find the setting that looks best. \par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       4.3.2 Neutral Color}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies the color for unclaimed countries.  The default is green, which displays unclaimed countries in different shades of green.  The other option is white.\par 
}{\plain\fs20 }\page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554510}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 5.1 The Options Menu}
{\up #}{\footnote # 5.1_The_Options_Menu}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0011}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b 5 Tweaking Gameplay}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 The fundamental rules of Fracas can be changed from game to game.  This allows players to customize games to meet their individual conquering needs.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b   5.1 The Options Menu}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The options menu contains all of the game parameters that can be tweaked.  Note that these parameters can only be changed when a game is not currently in progress.  In other words, you can't change how the game is played in the middle of the game.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       5.1.1 Initial Troop Placement}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies how densely populated the world map is at the start of the game.  There are five settings, from no countries populated to all countries populated.\par 
\par 
Initial troop placement sets the percentage of countries on the map that have troops in them at the start of the game.  Note that this setting does not influence the AMOUNT of troops present in these countries, however.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to normal, which means that about half of the countries start with troops in them.\par 
\par 
 }{\plain\fs20\b      5.1.2 Initial Troop Counts}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies approximately how many troops are already on the map when the game starts.  There are three settings, from Few to Lots.\par 
\par 
Only the number of countries specified with the "Initial Troop Placement" setting will have troops in them.  Depending on this setting, those countries will have up to 10 (Few), 50 (Normal), or 100 (Lots) troops present.\par 
\par 
Note that the distribution of initial troops is done fairly so that all players will have a stab at a healthy concentration of troops.  In other words, Player 4 will not have to worry about players 1, 2, and 3 scarfing up all the high troop counts on their first turn when picking HQ.  There will be enough large 'centers' of troops for all players to have a good start.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to normal, which means that no country will have more than 50 troops at the start of the game.\par 
\par 
    }{\plain\fs20\b   5.1.3 Bonus Troops}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies the number of troops, per country, per turn, that each player will be able to deploy during their reinforcement phase.  There are six settings, from 0 to 5.\par 
\par 
If this setting is zero, the only troops that will ever be present in the game are the initial troops found in countries when the game starts.  If set to any other number, then real estate has value in the game.  In other words, it pays to own land if you get more troops each turn as a result.  The player who owns the most land will be getting the largest troop bonus.\par 
\par 
This setting controls how quickly the map is populated with troops.  Larger numbers tend to unbalance the game and make one player dominant very quickly.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to 3 bonus troops, per country, per turn.\par 
\par 
 }{\plain\fs20\b      5.1.4 Naval Support}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies how powerful overseas troops are.  There are four settings, from weak to fully functional.\par 
\par 
The naval support options are:\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Rafts}{\plain\fs20  - troop strengths are cut to 1/10 of their value overseas\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Skiffs}{\plain\fs20  - troops are 1/4 as powerful overseas\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Destroyers}{\plain\fs20  - troops are 1/2 strength overseas\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Battleships}{\plain\fs20  - troops attack and defend with full capacity overseas\par 
\par 
This setting controls how important ports are.  If set to Rafts, building a port really doesn't buy much.  If set to Battleships, however, two countries can fight overseas as if they were adjacent to one another, and ports become deadly.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to Destroyers (1/2 strength overseas).\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       5.1.5 Enemy Ports}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies what happens when an enemy country is taken over.  There are two settings, "Captured" and "Destroyed".\par 
\par 
This one speaks for itself.  If set to "Captured", enemy ports become the property of the attacking player when a country is taken over.  If set to "Destroyed", then the port is destroyed when ownership of the country changes hands.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to "Destroyed".\par 
\par 
  }{\plain\fs20\b     5.1.6 When An Enemy Is Conquered...}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies what happens when an enemy HQ is destroyed.  There are four settings:\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b ...The remaining countries become neutral: }{\plain\fs20  When this setting is selected, destroying an enemy's HQ will cause the enemy to lose control of all countries.  These countries become neutral once again and all troops in them also become neutral.  The next player to legally annex one of these now-unclaimed countries gets all the troops in it, as normal.  This setting is the default.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b ...The remaining countries stay loyal: }{\plain\fs20  When this setting is selected, destroying an enemy's HQ will remove the player from the game, yet the color and ownership of the enemy's remaining countries does not change.  The enemy's countries with troops in them will never initiate combat again, but must be defeated to take ownership of the country.  Basically, this setting is the electronic equivalent of the phrase "They can take my gun when they pry it out of my cold, dead hands."\par 
}\par 
{\plain\fs20\b ...The victor claims all remaining countries:  }{\plain\fs20 When this setting is selected, destroying an enemy's HQ can often mean winning the game.  All of that enemy's land, troops, and ports become the property of the victor.  This setting will decrease the game's length substantially.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b ...The enemy is completely eradicated:}{\plain\fs20   When this setting is selected, destroying an enemy's HQ will destroy all of that enemy's troops and ports as well.  All countries claimed by that  enemy return to neutral ground.  Use this setting when you don't want to remember anything after the holocaust.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       5.1.7 Random Events}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This setting specifies whether or not random events happen throughout the game.  There are two settings, on and off.\par 
\par 
The events that can happen vary in scope and intensity, but all are beneficial.  They will always happen at the start of a player's turn.\par 
\par 
The random events do occur randomly, so if it looks like one player is being 'favored', it's all just luck of the draw.  There is some protection built in against this however:  Players with higher troop totals will be less likely to get a random event than those players without many troops.\par 
\par 
For a purely strategic game that }{\plain\fs20 depends little on luck, turn random events off.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to on.\par 
}\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\plain\fs20 }\page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554512}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 5.2 The Game Menu}
{\up #}{\footnote # 5.2_The_Game_Menu}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0012}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b 5 Tweaking Gameplay}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\plain\fs20\b   5.2 The Game Menu}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The Game menu contains all the controls for starting a game, Aborting a game, and changing the player parameters.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       5.2.1 Starting And Aborting A Game}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The "New Game, New Map" and "New Game, Same Map" menu selections will both start a new game based on the settings in the Options menu.  The "New Game, New Map" selection will also generate a new map based on the settings in the "Terraform" menu.\par 
\par 
To Abort a game in progress, choose "Abort Game" from the Game menu.  This will prematurely end the current game and allow the user to again change the settings in the "Options" and "Terraform" menus.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       5.2.2 Choosing Players}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
Choosing "Players..." from the Game menu will bring up the Players dialog box.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20 {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=208}}{\fldrslt }}\{bml \\LandMass\\helpfile\\PLAY.BMP\}\par 
\par 
In this dialog, the names and colors of each player can be changed, as well as the type of player.  To change a player's name, simply type it in the edit box for that player.  Use the color drop-down to select the color of the player.  Note that no two active players can use the same color.\par 
\par 
Use the option buttons to select one of three player types for each player.  The choices are human, computer, and inactive.  Human players are just that -- controlled by a human.  Inactive players do not participate in the current game.  Computer players are automatically controlled by the computer.  There must be at least two active players (human or computer) in a game.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       5.2.3 Personalities}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
When a computer player is selected in the Players dialog box, the Personality dropdown is activated.  This dropdown allows the user to select the computer 'personality' behind the player.  This affects how the computer reacts to different situations and generally defines 'how' they will play the game.\par 
\par 
There are six different computer personalities to play Fracas with.  Each has their own strengths and weaknesses, which depend largely on the type of map they're playing on.  This section will explain those strengths and weaknesses somewhat, but we don't want to give too much away -- it's much more fun to explore the personalities on your own.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Stonewall: }{\plain\fs20  This is the most well-rounded personality.  Stonewall plays well whether there is an abundance of land or water.  Generally defensive, Stonewall knows when to strike and when to be patient.  Playing on a map with three Stonewalls is a good challenge.  Stonewall works well on almost any map.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Bully:}{\plain\fs20   Bully is, well, a bully, and is one of the most dangerous personalities.  Bully has a tendency to pick fights with weaker players, and is a tad reckless.  It's not surprising to see Bully take off across the continent with all of his troops, making a beeline for someone's HQ.  On the other hand, he's not terribly defensive and can leave his back door wide open.  Bully works best on a map with lots of land.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Moose:}{\plain\fs20   Moose is stubborn.  This personality works by staying put and building up countries that he already owns.  Moose shuns troop movements, and human players will have to work to dig him out.  Moose works well on any map.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Ahab: }{\plain\fs20  Ahab is master of the oceans.  On a map with lots of land, Ahab plays like a weak Stonewall.  However, when there is water about, Ahab snatches up coastal territory and won't let go.  Ahab works best on a map with lots of water and islands.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Paranoid:  }{\plain\fs20 Paranoid is one of the more 'interesting' personalities in Fracas.  He's a bit more unpredictable than the others, and seems to be more concerned with keeping other players away from him than outright attacking.  Don't be surprised if Paranoid grabs up land in an out-of-the-way place on the map -- he's only doing it because the voices in his head tell him to...\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Clyde: }{\plain\fs20  The personality for beginners.  If the other personalities keep beating you up, or if you want to start simple, this is the personality for you.  Clyde plays a decent game, but will frequently make some boneheaded mistakes to give humans a fighting chance.  For beginners only.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       5.2.4 Computer Player Speed}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The Game menu also contains the Computer Player Speed control.  There are three settings, fast, medium, and slow.\par 
\par 
This setting controls the amount of time that a computer takes during their turn.  If you're the type of player that likes to think a lot during other people's turns, choose "Normal" or "Slow".  On the other hand, Fracas experts will want to pick "Fast" to make the game move as swiftly as possible.\par 
\par 
Note that this setting only controls a delay time and does not affect the computer players' ability to make moves.  In other words, setting it to "Fast" will not make the computer dumber.\par 
\par 
Note also that this setting may not have a profound effect on the speed of the game if the current map has lots of tiny countries on it.\par 
\par 
This setting defaults to Medium, which is about a three second delay for each computer player.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       5.2.5 Animation Speed}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
The overall speed of the explosion animations can be changed so that Fracas runs better on slower or faster machines.  Selecting "Animation Speed..." from the Game menu will bring up a dialog box with a slider control.  Use this control to adjust the speed of the animations.\par 
\par 
It may be helpful to adjust this control while on the Fracas title screen.  All changes will immediately take effect on the title explosions.  Click OK when the desired speed is attained.  Click Cancel to revert back to where it was.}{\plain\fs20 }\par\pard \page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554514}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 6 Strategies, Tips, And Tricks}
{\up #}{\footnote # 6_Strategies__Tips__And_Tricks}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0013}
\plain\b 
6 Strategies, Tips, And Tricks\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=212}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  Tip number one:  EXPERIMENT.  The gameplay and map settings can be combined in a multitude of ways to completely change the strategy of the game.  Try playing with a small land to water ratio and lots of islands.  Or try playing with no bonus troops.  And above all, HAVE FUN.\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=214}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  The computer players play a defensive game in general, with the exception of Bully.  This means that they usually don't move across large stretches of land quickly.  Use this to your advantage.\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=216}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  If the map has a lot of water on it, you need to become a naval power quickly.  Choose an HQ that's on or near water and get a port built as quickly as possible.  This will allow you to scarf up all the unclaimed troops on that big coastline.\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=218}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  Countries can hold a maximum of 999 troops.  If this maximum is exceeded by placing reinforcements, the excess troops are lost forever.  It's much better to use a troop movement to max out troops in a country.  The computer players don't know this, though...\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=220}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  The computer opponents play a good game, especially Stonewall.  You can learn a lot by setting up a four-player game with all computer opponents.  Watch 'em fight!\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=408}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  Sour your enemies' victories.  }{\plain\fs20 When you see one of your opponents is about take out another's HQ, start manevering to swoop in on their large troop concentrations.  If "When an enemy is conquered ... the remaining countries become neutral" is selected, you can grab the good ones before the victor has a chance!}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=222}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  If water is right-clicked, the information panel will show the name of the water mass.  This is useful for determining if the same water mass borders two distant countries.  Woe to the player who didn't notice the tiny channel at the edge of the map!\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=224}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  If naval support is set for 1/10, be prepared for long standoffs over water.  This setting works best on maps with lots of coastline, but not necessarily lots of islands.\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=226}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  To make a map that has absolutely no water whatsoever, change the country size to tiny, country proportions to proportional, minimum lake size to large, and land to water ratio to 9:1.\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=228}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  For a more 'fair' game that relies on chance as little as possible, disable random events and select "When an enemy is conquered ... the enemy is completely eradicated".  Make Initial Troop Placement "None" and make Bonus Troops greater than zero.  Also works with "When an enemy is conquered ... the remaining countries stay loyal."\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=230}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  For a more challenging game, make yourself player four.  This gives the computers pick of the litter on HQ countries.\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=232}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  For a more challenging game, increase the land to water ratio (make more land) and play against Bully or Stonewall.\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=234}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  For a more challenging game, decrease the land to water ratio (make more water) and play against Ahab or Moose.\par 
\par 
{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xAnchor ID=236}}{\fldrslt }}\{bmc FRACASICON1.BMP\}  Of course, the most challenging games are 4-player human contests.  Keep track of wins.  The winner of the last game is player 4 in the next game.  The person with the most wins gets free lunch on Friday.\par 
}{\plain\fs20 }\page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554516}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 7 How Does Fracas Work?}
{\up #}{\footnote # 7_How_Does_Fracas_Work_}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0014}
\plain\b 
7 How Does Fracas Work?\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 This section is for those users who feel compelled to take things apart.  Note that the source code is available for some pieces of Fracas at www.planet-source-code.com.  Just search for Merlo.\par 
\par 
I was originally inspired to write a random map generator by an old Commodore 64 game called Lords of Conquest, from Electronic Arts.  In Lords of Conquest, The object of the game was to conquer the enemies on the map by harvesting natural resources and using them to build things like weapons and boats.  Although there isn't much resource-gathering in Fracas, the map generator is remarkably similar.\par 
\par 
Basically, the map generator adds countries to the map, one by one, until it is done or until it can't place the current country.  The settings in the 'Terraform' menu are applied at different times during the build process to adjust the placement and size of new countries.  This code is available at www.planet-source-code.com and is called "LandMass".  This was the working title of Fracas.\par 
\par 
The map display is actually a tiled display.  Edges and corners of countries are blitted to the map after the bulk of the land.  Borders and troop numbers are then blitted on top of the finished map.  The particle explosions are re-blitted on top of the finished map repeatedly inside of a timer element.  Note that whenever a change to the map itself occurs, such as claiming a country and changing its color, the map is completely redrawn.  This system works well for a turn-based game, as quick changes to the map elements are not necessary.\par 
\par 
The particle explosion code is also available at www.planet-source-code.com and is called "Particle Explosion Simulation".  Basically, each ball in the explosion is an instance of the "Ball" class.  Each iteration through the animation loop, simple physics is applied to each active ball.  Gravity, elasticity, and velocities are all taken into account on an individual basis.  Slide the "Animation Speed" slider all the way to the left to see just how fast your machine can go.  Who said that VB was too slow for games?   :)\par 
\par 
Note that the Win32 API BitBlt instruction is used for the majority of graphics work in Fracas.  This allows the game to run smoothly on all Win 9x and NT platforms without getting into messy DirectX compatibility problems.  I do plan to jump on the DirectX 7.0 bandwagon with my next project, however.\par 
\par 
The Random Name generator, a very subtle addition to Fracas, is used to name each individual country and body of water.  Just right-click a country to see its name.  The name generator should always produce a perfectly pronounceable gibberish word.  It works by randomly choosing a letter of the alphabet to follow each other letter in the word.  The trick is to only choose letters that will 'sound' okay when spoken.  There are too many rules that govern this choice to list here, but I will say that the Scrabble(TM) letter tile distribution percentages are taken into account.  This makes the country names a little less otherworldly!\par 
\par 
If Fracas will be remembered for anything, I want it to be remembered as my first stab at artificial intelligence.  Although the AI isn't necessarily smart, it isn't stupid either and it beats me half the time.  The AI algorithms are complicated, but the mechanism is simple. The computer sees the game with fresh eyes each turn.  It calculates scores for every country on the board for each move it makes, and takes the highest score it finds.  There are about forty tunable parameters which give weight to the different decisions it makes. Tuning these parameters allows the creation of the individual personalities.  It was a lot of fun to tune "Stonewall".  He's about as good as I could get him, and he plays the game a lot like I do.\par 
}{\plain\fs20 }\page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554518}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 8 Credits & Acknowledgements}
{\up #}{\footnote # 8_Credits___Acknowledgements}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0015}
\plain\b 
8 Credits & Acknowledgements\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 Game concept and programming by Jason Merlo}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\plain\fs20 The following people}{\plain\fs20  helped playtest Fracas and offered constructive criticism and/or support during its creation:\par 
\par 
Debbie Hiott (my wife!)\par 
Christian Merlo\par 
Kelly Jamail\par 
David Hiott\par 
Ozzymandia Von Donut (our basset hound, who also did the 'port' sound effects)\par 
Smudge }{\plain\fs20 Becket\par 
Bowie & Stinky Pinky\par 
}{\plain\fs20 }\page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554520}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 9 How To Contact The Author}
{\up #}{\footnote # 9_How_To_Contact_The_Author}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0016}
\plain\b 
9 How To Contact The Author\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 You can reach me, Jason Merlo, at one of the following Email addresses:\par 
\par 
jmerlo@austin.rr.com\par 
jason.merlo@frco.com\par 
\par 
Please send all feedback to one of the above addresses.\par 
\par 
Fracas and all my other VB experiments are currently located at:\par 
\par 
http://home.austin.rr.com/smozzie\par 
\par 
If you really like Fracas a lot, and feel compelled to support this fledgling game programmer, please send all donations and/or beer money to:\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b Jason Merlo\par 
5910 Marilyn Dr.\par 
Austin, TX 78757-4425   USA}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
I }{\plain\fs20 would love a development position in the gaming industry}{\plain\fs20 .  If you like Fracas and can help, please do!}\par\pard \page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554522}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ Expanded Table Of Contents}
{\up #}{\footnote # Expanded_Table_Of_Contents}
\plain\b 
Expanded Table Of Contents\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20 }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777295}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 1 Welcome to Fracas!}}{\v 1_Welcome_To_Fracas}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777296}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 1.1 What Is Fracas?}}{\v 1_Welcome_To_Fracas}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777297}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 1.2 How Do I Win?}}{\v 2_Getting_Started}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777250}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 1.3 System Requirements}}{\v 1_Welcome_To_Fracas}{\plain\fs20 \par 
\par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777298}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 2 Getting Started}}{\v 2_Getting_Started}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777299}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 2.1 Installing Fracas}}{\v 2_Getting_Started}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777300}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 2.2 Starting A Game}}{\v 2_Getting_Started}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777301}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 2.2.1 New Game, New Map}}{\v 2_Getting_Started}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777302}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 2.2.2 New Game, Same Map}}{\v 2_Getting_Started}{\plain\fs20 \par 
\par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777303}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3 How To Play}}{\v 3.1_Parts_Of_The_Screen}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777304}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.1 Parts Of The Screen}}{\v 3.1_Parts_Of_The_Screen}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777305}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.1.1 The Map}}{\v 3.1_Parts_Of_The_Screen}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777306}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.1.2 The Statistics Panel}}{\v 3.1_Parts_Of_The_Screen}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777307}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.1.3 The Information Panel}}{\v 3.1_Parts_Of_The_Screen}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777308}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.1.4 Messages}}{\v 3.1_Parts_Of_The_Screen}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777309}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.2 The World Map}}{\v 3.2_The_World_Map}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777310}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.2.1 Unclaimed Countries}}{\v 3.2_The_World_Map}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777311}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.2.2 Claimed Countries}}{\v 3.2_The_World_Map}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777312}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.2.3 HQs}}{\v 3.2_The_World_Map}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777313}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.2.4 Ports And Water}}{\v 3.2_The_World_Map}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777314}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.3 Phases Of A Turn}}{\v 3.3_Phases_Of_A_Turn}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777315}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.3.1 Troop Reinforcement Phase}}{\v 3.3_Phases_Of_A_Turn}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777316}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.3.2 Action Phase}}{\v 3.3_Phases_Of_A_Turn}{\plain\fs20 \par 
            }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777317}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.3.2.1 Annexing Land}}{\v 3.3_Phases_Of_A_Turn}{\plain\fs20 \par 
            }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777318}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.3.2.2 Building A Port}}{\v 3.3_Phases_Of_A_Turn}{\plain\fs20 \par 
            }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777319}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.3.2.3 Attacking An Oppenent}}{\v 3.3_Phases_Of_A_Turn}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777320}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.3.3 Troop Movement Phase}}{\v 3.3_Phases_Of_A_Turn}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777321}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.3.4 Passing and Resigning}}{\v 3.3_Phases_Of_A_Turn}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777322}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.}{\fs20 4 Attack And Defense Totals}}{\v 3.4_Attack_And_Defense_Totals}{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\plain\fs20       }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777323}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.}{\fs20 4.1 Defense Total}}{\v 3.4_Attack_And_Defense_Totals}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777324}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 }{\fs20 3.}{\fs20 4.2 Attack Total}}{\v 3.4_Attack_And_Defense_Totals}{\plain\fs20 \par 
}{\plain\fs20       }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777325}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 3.}{\fs20 4.3 Combat Resolution}}{\v 3.4_Attack_And_Defense_Totals}{\plain\fs20 \par 
\par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777326}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4 Tweaking The Map}}{\v 4.1_Generating_A_New_Map}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777327}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.1 Generating A New Map}}{\v 4.1_Generating_A_New_Map}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777328}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.2 The Terraform Menu}}{\v 4.2_The_Terraform_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777329}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.2.1 Country Size}}{\v 4.2_The_Terraform_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777330}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.2.2 Country Proportions}}{\v 4.2_The_Terraform_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777331}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.2.3 Country Shapes}}{\v 4.2_The_Terraform_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777332}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.2.4 Minimum Allowed Lake Size}}{\v 4.2_The_Terraform_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777333}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.2.5 Approximate Land To Water Ratio}}{\v 4.2_The_Terraform_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777334}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.2.6 Islands}}{\v 4.2_The_Terraform_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777335}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.3 The Draw Menu}}{\v 4.3_The_Draw_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777336}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.3.1 Borders}}{\v 4.3_The_Draw_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777337}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 4.3.2 Neutral Color}}{\v 4.3_The_Draw_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
\par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777338}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5 Tweaking Gameplay}}{\v 5.1_The_Options_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777339}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.1 The Options Menu}}{\v 5.1_The_Options_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777340}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.1.1 Initial Troop Placement}}{\v 5.1_The_Options_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777341}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.1.2 Initial Troop Counts}}{\v 5.1_The_Options_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777342}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.1.3 Bonus Troops}}{\v 5.1_The_Options_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777343}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.1.4 Naval Support}}{\v 5.1_The_Options_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777344}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.1.5 Enemy Ports}}{\v 5.1_The_Options_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777345}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.1.6 Conquering HQs}}{\v 5.1_The_Options_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777346}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.1.7 Random Events}}{\v 5.1_The_Options_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
  }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777347}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.2 The Game Menu}}{\v 5.2_The_Game_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777348}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.2.1 Starting And Aborting A Game}}{\v 5.2_The_Game_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777349}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.2.2 Choosing Players}}{\v 5.2_The_Game_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777350}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.2.3 Personalities}}{\v 5.2_The_Game_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777351}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.2.4 Computer Player Speed}}{\v 5.2_The_Game_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
      }{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777352}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 5.2.5 Animation Speed}}{\v 5.2_The_Game_Menu}{\plain\fs20 \par 
 \par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777353}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 6 Strategies, Tips, And Tricks}}{\v 6_Strategies__Tips__And_Tricks}{\plain\fs20 \par 
\par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777354}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 7 How Does Fracas Work?}}{\v 7_How_Does_Fracas_Work_}{\plain\fs20 \par 
\par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777355}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 8 Credits & Acknowledgements}}{\v 8_Credits___Acknowledgements}{\plain\fs20 \par 
\par 
}{\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xHotspot ID=16777356}}{\fldrslt }}{\uldb {\fs20 9 How To Contact The Author}}{\v 9_How_To_Contact_The_Author}{\plain\fs20 }{\plain\fs20 }\par\pard \page\pard\plain\s3\keepn {\field{\*\fldinst{PRIVATE ForeHelp xTopic ID=33554525}}{\fldrslt }}{\up $}{\footnote $ 3.4 Attack And Defense Totals}
{\up #}{\footnote # 3.4_Attack_And_Defense_Totals}
{\up +}{\footnote + [unnamed]:0007}
\plain\b 
{\plain\b 3 How To Play}{\plain\b }\par \pard\plain\s0 \plain\fs20 
\par 
{\plain\fs20\b   3.4 Attack And Defense Totals}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
This section will explain the math behind the attack and defense strength calculations.  If you're the type of person that doesn't like to know the details about how things work, then skip this section and know that right-clicking a country will show you all the information you need.  If you want to micromanage your empire, however, this is important stuff to know.\par 
\par 
      }{\plain\fs20\b 3.4.1 Defense Total}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
Each country has a separate defense total.  Put simply, a country's defense total is the sum of the following:\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b 1.}{\plain\fs20   The number of troops in that country,\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b 2.}{\plain\fs20   The number of troops in all friendly adjacent countries, and\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b 3. }{\plain\fs20  A fraction of the troops in all friendly overseas countries that have ports.\par 
\par 
In other words, the troops in a country defend that country.  They are aided by all friendly troops in adjacent countries -- traveling a short distance over land to defend one of your own isn't difficult.  Said country is also defended by a portion of troops from all friendly overseas countries which have ports -- traveling in warships across water is a difficult task, so a country can only offer a fraction of its services overseas.\par 
\par 
Note:  The fraction of troops that can attack and defend overseas is configurable and is explained in section 5.1.4.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       3.4.2 Attack Total}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
Attack totals are calculated for enemy countries.  Put simply, when it's time to attack an enemy country, an attack total is calculated for that particular country.  This number is the sum of the following:\par 
}\par 
{\plain\fs20\b 1. }{\plain\fs20  The number of troops in all of the attacker's adjacent countries, and\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b 2. }{\plain\fs20  A fraction of the troops in all of the attacker's overseas countries that have ports.\par 
\par 
In other words, troops in a country next to an enemy country can attack the enemy with full strength.  Troops who can only reach an enemy country with the help of a port can only assist with a fraction of their strength.\par 
\par 
}{\plain\fs20\b       3.4.3 Combat Resolution}\par 
{\plain\fs20 \par 
When an attack is made on a country, the attack total is calculated from the attacker's attacking countries, and the defense total is calculated from the defender's defending countries.  These two numbers are compared, and the battle is resolved as follows:\par 
\par 
If the attack strength is less than or equal to the defense strength, then the country cannot be attacked.  No turn is lost, and the attacker can choose another action.\par 
\par 
If the attack strength is greater than the defense strength, then the attack succeeds.  The amount of troops lost by the defender is equal to the difference between attack and defense totals.  If this difference is greater than the number of troops in the defending country, the country is lost and the attacker gains control of it.\par 
}{\plain\fs20 }}